0. – Os supraoccipitale, position of foramen v. occipitalis externa relative to the prominentia cerebellaris (Fig. 3): ventral of the prominentia (0); dorsal, proximal of the crista nuchalis transversa (1).
1. – Os supraoccipitale, development of sulcus v. occipitalis externa (Fig. 3): short grooves (0); ven- trally extended and curved grooves (1). Ven- trally extended and curved grooves were observed in Rhynchotus and Nothoprocta.
2. – Os supraoccipitale, crista nuchalis sagittalis (Fig. 3): absent (0); present (1). The area of the prominentia cerebellaris of tinamous is typically smooth (not marked by a crista nuchalis sagittalis), with the exception of Rhynchotus, Tinamotis pentlandii, and Nothoprocta taczanowskii, in which its surface is scarred by a marked crest.
3. – Os exoccipitale, processus paroccipitalis (Fig. 3): not developed, flat or poorly developed as a wing- like projection, approaching but not extending below the ventral margin of the otic cavity (0); distinctly prominent, projecting ventrally (1). A poorly developed processus paroccipitalis is found in some out-group taxa (Galliformes) and in all tinamous (except for Rhynchotus and Nothoprocta taczanowskii). Only this tinamou species posses a markedly prominent processus paroccipitalis; a similar condition is also present in other out- group taxa (e.g. Ratitae).
4. – Os exoccipitale, foramen n. vagi, nearer to the foramen n. ophthalmici than to foramen n. hypoglossum (Figs 3 and 5): no (0); yes (1).
5. + Fossa temporalis (Fig. 4): small temporal notch, smaller than otic cavity, not extending caudally beyond the cotyla quadratica squamosi (0); larger or about the same size as the otic cavity, caudal extension about or beyond the position of the cotyla (1). A well-developed fossa temporalis in Tinamidae (condition 1) and related Palaeognathae was de- scribed by Pycraft (1900); however, we observed variation in the development of this fossa among tinamous, for example, a distinct small temporal notch enclosed by a rostroventrally orientated processus zygomaticus together with a pointed processus postorbitalis characterizes the skull of the open area tinamous (with the exception of Rhynchotus) and some out-group taxa. We con- sider the highly derived skull morphology of Apteryx to be non-comparable for this character.
6. – Os squamosum, prominentia suprameatica (Elzanowski, 1987) developed as a distinct crest (Fig. 4): absent (0); present (1). The prominentia suprameatica flares out from the base of the processus zygomaticus, dorsal of the otic cavity (Elzanowski, 1987). Although this structure is absent or minimally developed in most tinamous, it projects as a wing-like crest in some open area taxa such as Nothura, Nothoprocta, and Rhynchotus, among others. In these taxa, the suprameatic prominence is clearly visible both in lateral and ventral view.
7. – Os squamosum, processus zygomaticus (Fig. 4): absent or vestigial (0); present, variably devel- oped (1); present, laterally compressed (2). The body of the processus zygomaticus in Rhynchotus and Nothoprocta (also in Eudromia, although less developed) is short and laterally compressed, proj- ecting as a crest, which has been tentatively indentified as the area of attachment of the aponeurosis zygomatica (Elzanowski, 1987). This process is also distinctly compressed in the ratites (e.g. Rhea and Apteryx). A lower ridge is also dis- tinguishable on the processus zygomaticus of other open-area tinamous. See character 33 of Mayr (2011) for conditions in out-group taxa.
8. – Os squamosum, ventral margin of the processus zygomaticus (Fig. 4): straight (0); notched (1). The notched margin of the proc. zygomaticus forms a border with the ala parasphenoidalis, roofing the otic cavity in Rheidae, Rhynchotus, and some species of Nothoprocta (e.g. N. ornata). A non- comparable state was assigned to Galloanseres (the process is absent or vestigial in these taxa, see character 7).
9. – Sutura frontoparietalis (Figs 3 and 4): absent (0); present (1) (Mayr, 2011: character 32).
10. – Os frontale, dorsal surface, distinct fossa at midline (Fig. 3): absent (0); present (1). The interorbital surface of the skull of most taxa is essentially flat; only in Rhea, Eudromia, and Tinamotis is it scarred by a rounded depression at midline. This condition differs from that of some Anseriformes, where the depression is a longi- tudinal concavity on the frontal region of the skull (depressio frontalis of Baumel et al., 1993).
11. – Orbita, margo supraorbitalis, glandular de- pressions (fossae glandularum nasales, Fig. 3): absent (0); present (1). The portion of the frontal bordering the orbit forms a sharp supraorbital margin in most tinamous; only in Tinamus and Crypturellus glandular depressions (i.e. fossae glandularum nasales) are developed on the dorsal supraorbital border; these depressions are shallow and narrow, bounded laterally by the ossicula supraorbitales, and separated by a wide space
 © 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
(they do not reach the midline as in other birds, such as Charadriiformes, Procellariiformes, and others).
12. + Orbita, ossicula supraorbitales (Fig. 3): absent (0); incomplete row of ossicles (1); paired com- plete row, forming a robust supraorbital layer sur- rounding the fossae glandularum nasales (2). After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005, character 7). Parker (1866) described these ossicles forming a rough layer on the dorsal surface of the skull in Tinamidae, and Lucas (1866) noted their absence in Nothura maculosa; variation of these struc- tures within Tinamidae was also mentionated by Elzanowski (1987). In Tinamus and Crypturellus, these ossicula enclose the fossae glandularum nasales on the margo supraorbitalis (character 11), whereas other species (e.g Eudromia, Nothocercus, and Nothoprocta) with ossicles in this area lack such depressions. Remains of supraorbital ossicles were observed in speci- mens of Nothocercus bonapartei and Nothocercus julius; owing to the preservation of the exam- ined specimens, it was not possible to confirm a positive scoring for Nothocercus nigrocapillus. Based on the morphology of the irregular supraorbital margin observed in some speci- mens of Tinamotis pentlandii, it is likely that the ossicula were present in this species and lost after preparation; however, remains of these struc- tures were not preserved in the examined speci- mens, and thus this taxon was coded as unknown ‘?’.
13. – Orbita, interorbital area (os frontale), dorsal surface (Fig. 3): broader than or of similar width as the internarial area (0); narrower (1). This char- acter describes the variation observed in the width of the interorbital area of tinamous. The interorbital surface (excluding the fossae glandularum nasales) is wider than or subequal to the internarial area (at the caudal end of the external nares) in some tinamous (e.g. Eudromia, Taoniscus, and Rhynchotus), whereas it is dis- tinctly narrower in Nothura, Crypturellus, and Nothoprocta, among others.
14. – Orbita, fonticuli orbitocraniales (Fig. 4): ves- tigial or absent (0); present, large foramina present (1). Only the open area taxa Taoniscus and Nothura present these rounded openings in the caudal wall of the orbita. Because of the highly modified nature of the skull in Apteryx, we con- sider the character non-comparable for this taxon.
15. – Orbita, sulcus, and foramen n. olfactorii forming a wide transversal fenestra, which perforates the septum interorbitale (Fig. 4): yes (0) no (1). Next to the dorsal margin of the septum interorbitale, the sulcus for the olfactory nerve and the ethmoid
artery (i.e. sulcus n. olfactorii; Baumel and Witmer, 1993) is developed as a shallow and thin groove in the open-area tinamous; the foramen n. olfactorii is relatively smaller in Eudromia and Tinamotis than in other open-area groups. By contrast, both foramen and sulcus are greatly excavated in the forest taxa Nothocercus, Tinamus, and Crypturellus. We consider this character to be non- comparable in Apteryx, where this region of the skull is obscured by the highly modified orbital area.
16. – Orbita, septum interorbitale extensively os- sified (Fig. 4): yes (0); no (1). After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 1). The fonticuli interorbitales are typically present in most tinamous (only absent in Tinamotis and Eudromia).
17. + Os mesethmoidale (Fig. 4): does not reach rostrally beyond nasal–frontal hinge (0); extends rostrally immediately beyond the nasal–frontal hinge (1); extends far rostrally (2). Pycraft (1900: 198) discussed this feature and noted that the rostral extension in Struthio and Rhea exceed- ed that of other ratites. This feature was coded by Mayr (2011), albeit only with two states, rec- ognizing the derived one in Apteryx and Rheidae. Cracraft (1986: character 50) reported the absence of a ‘largely ossified’ septum in the nasal region (mesethmoid) of Tinamidae, whereas Mayr (2011: character 8) noted the absence of this feature in both Tinamidae and Rheidae. In Ichthyornis this character has been inferred from the morphol- ogy of the praemaxilla (Clarke, 2004).
18. – Os ectethmoidale (Fig. 4): separated from os lacrimale (0); contacting or fused to os lacrimale, forming a lacrimal–ectetmoid complex (Cracraft, 1968) (1); extensively fused with os lacrimale and nasal capsule (2). After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005, character 5). Ericson (1997: character 6) coded the contact between these bones as present in Rheidae; we find this contact to be absent in all Rhea specimens examined (for a discussion of this character, see Cracraft, 1968: 330). Because these bones form part of the highly modified praeorbital region in Apteryx, we assigned an additional state (2) for this taxon.
19. + Lacrimal–ectethmoid complex (Fig. 4): narrow plate on ventromedial part of the antorbital wall, enclosing a wide and circular opening (foramen orbitonasale laterale) (0); wide plate that covers most of the antorbital wall (foramen orbitonasale laterale narrow (2); plate and enclosed foramen with triangular outline (1). Bertelli and Chiappe (2005, character 6) observed variation in the degree of development of the lacrimal–ectethmoid complex within Tinamidae. A narrow plate, enclosing a
PHYLOGENETIC INTERRELATIONSHIPS OF TINAMOUS 171
 © 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
172 S. BERTELLI ET AL.
 circular foramen orbitonasale laterale character- izes the antorbital area of the skull of the forest tinamous). Among the open-area groups, this con- dition is only present in Rhynchotus, Taoniscus, and the species Nothura minor. A non-comparable state was assigned to out-group taxa in which the lacrimal–ectethmoid complex is absent (char- acter 18).
20. – Os lacrimale, dorsal surface of the head (Fig. 3): expanded (0); very narrow (1). In tinamous, the lacrimal contacts the frontal and nasal; this con- dition is similar in Apteryx and Galliformes; by contrast, in Rhea and Anhimidae it articulates only with the nasal (Cracraft, 1968). The devel- opment of the dorsal surface of the lacrimals varies across species in tinamous. Only in the open- area tinamous Rhynchotus, Taoniscus, Nothura darwinii, Nothura maculosa, and most species of Nothoprocta (except Nothoprocta cinerascens) are the lacrimals distinctively narrower than in any other tinamous or out-group taxa (state 1). This character was scored as non-applicable for Apteryx, the lacrimals of which are not exposed on the dorsal surface of the skull. In Rhea this condi- tion was scored as expanded (0), because the main body of the lacrimal is dorsally wide, regardless of the presence of a supraorbital process proj- ecting caudolaterally.
21. – Os lacrimale, lacrimal duct (Fig. 4): perforat- ing the lacrimal as a foramen or almost com- plete foramen (0); forming a wide notch (incisura ductus lacrimalis) (1); not perforating the lacri- mal (2). Because its delicate nature makes it prone to damage, this character could not be con- firmed in some taxa (e.g. Crypturellus and Nothocercus) with partially broken lacrimals. The incisura ductus lacrimalis (1) was coded as present if the lacrimal notch was distinctly wide dorsoventrally, forming a slender pediculus lacrimalis (Elzanowski, 1987). This character was scored as non-applicable in Galliformes, in which the ventral projection of the lacrimal in front of the orbit is absent.
22. – Os parasphenoidale, processus basipterygoideus, developed as a large and ovoid facet for articu- lation with the pterygoid (Mayr 2011: character 24; Fig. 5): no (0), yes (1).
23. – Os parasphenoidale, processus basipterygoideus (Fig. 5): stout process (0); elongated (1). The pres- ence of a slender processus basipterygoideus is the most widely distributed condition within tinamous. Because of morphological differences (character 22), we coded this character as non- comparable for Galloanseres.
24. + Os parasphenoidale, processus parasphenoidalis medialis, aspect in caudal view (Fig. 3): absent
(0); weakly developed ventrally as a low bump (1); prominent, developed as a conspicuous bony knob (2). Mayr (2011; character 30) distin- guished only two states for this character. Within tinamous, these processes are prominent only in Nothoprocta taczanowskii, and are poorly devel- oped in Nothocercus. Processus mediales parasphenoidales of the lamina parasphenoidalis are equivalent to the ‘mamillary processes’ of Pycraft (1900), the ‘basal tubercles of the basitemporal plate’ of Lee et al. (1997), as well as to ‘medial processes of the parashenoid’ (Bock, 1963).
25. – Os parasphenoidale, lamina parasphenoidalis (basitemporal plataform), medial crest marked: absent (0); present (1). A distinct medial ridge was observed on the rostral end of the basitemporal plataform of Nothocercus specimens.
26. – Os parasphenoidale, lamina parasphenoidalis, bony lateral projection directly rostral of ostium canalis carotici (Fig. 5): absent (0); present (1). These short and pointed processes, projecting towards the processus basipterygoideus, only occur in Rhynchotus and most Nothoprocta species.
27. – Os parasphenoidale, ostium canalis carotici more caudally placed, at about the middle of the lamina parasphenoidalis (Fig. 5): no (0); yes (1). Condition 1 is only found in Tinamotis within Tinamidae; in all other tinamous the ostium opens on each side of the lamina parasphenoidalis, close to the eustachian tube openings.
28. – Tuba auditiva (Fig. 5): open rostral, close to midline (0); open laterally, widely separated (1). In all palaeognaths these rostral openings are widely separated (Mayr, 2011: character 29).
29. – Os palatinum, rostrocaudally wide pars choanalis (Fig. 5): present (0); absent (1). Within Tinamidae, the pars choanalis of most open- area groups (except for Rhynchotus) is some- what narrow rostrocaudally, with a well-developed processus caudomedialis. This condition differs from other tinamous, with a wider pars lateralis and a small or vestigial processus caudomedialis. Although this projection is variable within Lithornithidae, it is vestigial in Lithornis (Houde, 1988, p. 20). Codings for Taoniscus nanus were based on data from Silveira and Höfling (2007). We consider this character to be non-comparable for Apteryx.
30. – Os palatinum, processus maxillaris (Fig. 5): gradually curved from pars choanalis, facing obliquely ventromedially (0); contact distinctly curved, processes facing ventrally (1). This con- dition is typical of the species of Nothoprocta. Codings for Taoniscus nanus were based on data from Silveira and Höfling (2007).
© 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
31. Os palatinum, jugamentum maxillopalatinum (Elzanowski, 1987): absent (0); present (1). A dis- tinct medial wing-like projection (jugamentum maxillopalatinum of Elzanowski, 1987) is present in the open-area groups Nothura and Eudromia. For an assessment of homologous conditions (e.g. processus maxillopalatini fused along midline), we considered out-group taxa non-comparable for this character.
32. – Processus maxillares of the ossa palatina and processus maxillopalatini of the ossa maxillaria (Fig. 5): mediolaterally wide plates (wider than fossa choanalis) (0); mediolaterally narrow plates (same width or narrower than fossae) (1); dis- tinctly narrower than fossae, the latter with rounded proximal end (2). The processus maxillares of the ossa palatina and the processus maxillopalatini of the ossa maxillaria form slender plates or are slightly constricted mediolaterally (enclosing wide fossae choanalis) in most open- area tinamous (states 1 and 2), whereas these processes are wide throughout nearly their length (with narrow fossae) in the forest groups (state 0). Codings for Taoniscus nanus were based on data from Silveira and Höfling (2007). We con- sider Galloanseres non-comparable for this char- acter (see character 31).
33. – Os quadratojugale, dorsal process (Fig. 4): absent or vestigial (0), present (1). A pointed process on the dorsal surface of the os quadratojugale is present in Tinamidae (except for Nothoprocta and Rhynchotus).
34. + Maxilla, rostrum maxillare, length with respect to the craniocaudal length of the external nares in lateral view (Figs 3 and 4): shorter (0); equal or longer (1); distinctly longer (2).
35. – Maxilla and mandibula, rostrum maxillare (upper mandible) and rostrum mandibularis (lower mandible), dorsal and ventral plate, lateral grooves: absent (0); present (1) (Mayr, 2011: character 40; Bertelli et al. 2002; Bertelli and Giannini, 2013). This character was modified from Bertelli et al. (2002: characters 1 and 4, which are correlat- ed). These grooves, and their counterparts in the mandible, correspond to the unique tripartite rhamphothecal structure of palaeognaths. This character was considered non-comparable for Galloanseres (lateral grooves absent, character 35).
36. – Mandibula, rostrum mandibulare, ventral surface, lateral grooves: caudally convergent and contacting each other (0); parallel (1); caudally divergent (2). Character 3 of Bertelli et al. (2002).
37. – Mandibula, rostrum mandibulare, dorsal surface: symphysis concave (0); symphysis flat (1) (Mayr, 2011; character 43).
38. – Mandibula, dentary: unforked in lateral view, or with weakly developed dorsal ramus (0); strong- ly forked, having well-developed dorsal rami (1) (Mayr, 2011).
39. + Mandibula, ramus mandibularis (Fig. 4): straight (0); only slightly decurved or decurved towards tip (1); markedly decurved (2). Modi- fied from Bertelli et al. (2002) and Bertelli and Giannini (2013).
40. – Mandibula, processus retroarticularis (Fig. 6): absent (0); poorly projected, as a small and rounded tubercle (1); distinctly projected, as a short and stout process (2); long and compressed blade- like process, strongly projected (3). Most tinamous (except for Eudromia) exhibit a small retroarticular process (state 1). This condition was also de- scribed for tinamous by Parker (1866) and Rhea by Pycraft (1900). The presence of a long and com- pressed retroarticular process is a synapomorphy of Galloanseres (Cracraft, 1988; Mayr, 2011), and was coded as a separated character state.
41. – Mandibula, cotyla caudalis and lateralis: sepa- rated (0); confluent (1; Fig. 6A).
42. + Mandibula, cotyla lateralis and caudalis (Fig. 6): short, kidney-shaped articular surface (0); elon- gate (1); long and strongly curved (2). Bock (1963) discussed the presence, absence, and homology of the cotyla lateralis and caudalis across a wide sampling of birds. Both cotylae are confluent in tinamous, Lithornis and Apteryx. Parker (1864) described the kidney-shaped condition in Tinamidae. We observed more variation in the degree of development of this cotyla among the specimens, and discriminate two additional char- acter states. This character was considered non- applicable in taxa without cotyla caudalis; it is absent in Ichthyornis (Clarke, 2004).
43. – Mandibula, processus medialis mandibularis, facies articularis parasphenoidalis (Fig. 6): ves- tigial or not developed (0); distinct (1). A medial facet, near the tip of the processus medialis mandibularis, is well developed in most forest tinamous (e.g. Tinamus, Nothocercus, and some Crypturellus) and Tinamotis, usually connected to the cotylae caudalis and lateralis, forming a common articular surface. The shape and posi- tion of these articular surfaces correlates with a process present in the lateral area of the lamina parasphenoidalis that articulates with the facet of the mandible (Baumel and Witmer, 1993).
44. + Mandibula, cotyla medialis (Fig. 6): shallow and somewhat round facet (0); distinct facet, ex- tending to the medial border of the articular surface of the articular mandible (1); deep and craniocaudally elongated facet, protruding the medial border of the mandible (2). The cotyla
PHYLOGENETIC INTERRELATIONSHIPS OF TINAMOUS 173
 © 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
174 S. BERTELLI ET AL.
 medialis is typically well developed in the species
of Nothoprocta.
45. – Mandibula, processus medialis mandibularis,
aspect in dorsal view (Mayr 2011: character 45; Fig. 6): triangular (0); long and narrow (1). Pre- viously this character was considered together with character 42 as a single character (Bertelli and Chiappe, 2005). After further study, we ob- served that the shape of the processus medialis mandibularis and the development of cotylae caudalis et lateralis varies independently across the tinamou species examined; thus we opted to add an additional character to accommodate this morphological variation observed within Tinamidae. According to Bock (1963), the shape of the processus medialis mandibularis is corre- lated with the development of both m. depres- sor mandibulae and m. pterygoideus, which attach to this process. The outline of this process is gen- erally triangular in Tinamidae, with the excep- tion of the narrow and dorsally oriented process present in Nothoprocta (except for Nothoprocta cinerascens).
46. – Quadratum, processus mandibularis medialis, medial area (between articular condylae) in ventral view with a swollen aspect, inflated (Figs 5A and 6I): absent (0); present (1). Among tinamous, this condition is typical of Eudromia.
47. + Quadratum, processus mandibularis, prominentia submeatica of Elzanowski (1987; Fig. 6), dorsal projection in lateral view: absent or slightly developed (0); dorsally projected rela- tive to the edge of the processus orbitalis (1); mark- edly more projected than the processus, with a marked ridge (2). Elzanowski (1987) named the dorsal projection of the processus mandibularis of the quadrate of tinamous prominentia submeatica.
48. – Quadratum, shape of the processus orbitalis (Fig. 6): curved and flaring out at its tip (0); almost straight, distal expansion less developed or absent, subequal in proportion with the rest of the process (1); wide and robust, distal expansion vestigial (2); wide at its base, with pointed tip (3). In most tinamous, the orbital process becomes flared and widens at its tip, and is generally elongated as opposed to the robust aspect of Eudromia. A robust processus orbitalis is also present in Rhea.
49. – Axis, corpus with pneumatic foramina on lateral sides (Fig. 7): no (0), yes (1). Mayr (2011: character 48).
50. – Axis, processus spinosus (Fig. 7): blunt pro- cesses (0), bladelike and curved (1).
51. – Axis, processus ventralis, distinct bladelike and curved projection (Fig. 7): absent (0); present (1).
52. 53.
54.
– Axis, processus costalis (Fig. 7): absent or ves- tigial (0); present, well developed (1). Mayr (2011: character 50).
– First series of vertebrae cervicales (from third vertebra cervicalis), processus costales (Fig. 7): absent or poorly projected (0), well de- veloped (1).
+ Synsacrum, aspect of centrum and processus costales in ventral view (Fig. 10): centrum with a flat aspect and wide processus costales, not com- pletely fused to the lamina (0); most vertebrae with compressed centrum; relatively narrow pro- cesses, fused to the lamina; caudal, most el- ements with morphology similar to condition 0 (1); vertebrae with compressed centrum; rela- tively narrow processus, fused to the lamina, processus costales gradually shorter towards caudal end of synsacrum (or caudal most absent, angular aspect of the caudal end of synsacrum) (2). Between 15 and 18 vertebrae comprise the synsacrum of tinamous (Parker, 1866; Verheyen, 1960); this character is related to the degree of fusion of the vertebrae synsacrales of the postacetabular portion of the synsacrum. State 2 is typical of open-area tinamous (except for Eudromia and Tinamotis), whereas the oppo- site condition is characteristic of Tinamus (state 0) and the galliform out-group taxa. Ratites were scored as not comparable because the strong lateral compression of the postacetabular portion of the synsacrum and ilia prevent the determi- nation of character states.
– Synsacrum (vertebrae lumbicales), vertebral arches, dorsal swell of praeacetabular portion ad- jacent to the medial confluence of ilia (Fig. 10): absent (0); present (1). Rhea and Apteryx were scored as not comparable because the strong lateral compression of the praeacetabular portion of the ilia, which covers the vertebral arches of the synsacrum dorsally, prevents the determina- tion of character states.
– Synsacrum, dorsal surface of postacetabular area, distinctly depressed (Fig. 10): absent (0); present (1); with marked muscular impressions (2). The dorsal area of the synsacrum of the open area tinamou (except for Eudromia and Tinamotis) is distinctly depressed (state 1); this morphol- ogy (which may represent the attachment areas of muscles of the tail, musculi levatores caudae) differs from that of some out-group taxa (e.g. Chauna), with two conspicuous muscular impres- sions, and thus it was coded as a separate con- dition (state 2).
+ Thoracic vertebrae, fusion (Fig. 7): all unfused, notarium absent (0); three vertebrae fused (1); four vertebrae fused (2); five vertebrae fused (3).
55.
56.
57.
© 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 11). A notarium composed of four fused thoracic ver- tebrae is the condition widely distributed within Tinamidae. Variation was observed in some species, such as of the genus Nothocercus (e.g. Nothocercus bonapartei) with three vertebrae fused, and most species of Nothoprocta (except Nothocercus cinerascens) with five thoracic vertebrae fused.
58. – Sternum, processus craniolateralis, dorsal view (Fig. 8): short, widely spaced (0); variably devel- oped, craniolaterally orientated, less projected than the spina interna (1); greatly elongated crani- ally, more projected (or reaching) the spina interna (2); projecting laterally (3). This character de- scribes the variation in the relative length and orientation of these processes. These processes are typically elongated in most open-area tinamous (except for Eudromia and Tinamotis). By con- trast, the processus craniolaterales are dis- tinctly short and widely separated in most out-group taxa, a condition that was scored as a separate state (0).
59. – Sternum, rostrum, spina externa: absent (0); present (1) (Livezey, 1997: character 60). The ex- ternal spine is present in Ichthyornis (Clarke, 2004), although not blade-like (see Mayr 2011, character 70). This process is present in Lithornis (Houde, 1988: fig. 10). Livezey (1997) coded the external spine present in Tinamidae, but the feature is absent in tinamous (see also Bertelli 2002: character 117).
60. – Sternum, rostrum, spina interna (Fig. 8): absent (0); present (1). Lee et al. (1997: character 7) pro- posed the absence of a ‘sternal manubrium’ as a synapomorphy of ratites; the absence of this structure in ratites and its presence in Tinamidae was described by Parker (1866) and Pycraft (1900: 216); however, because this manubrium can com- prise the external spine (Chauna, Lithornis, and Ichthyornis), the internal spine (Tinamidae), or both (Galliformes), we follow Bertelli (2002: char- acters 117 and 118) in recognizing separate char- acters. According to Baumel (1993), the spina externa is most often present in the sternal rostrum of birds. One notable exception to this trend are the Tinamidae, where the rostrum com- prises just the internal spine (Pycraft, 1900: p. 221; Bertelli, 2002).
61. – Sternum, rostrum, relative width of spina interna rostri: slender, rostral end narrower than craniolateral process (0); wide, broader than craniolateral process (1). The width of the inter- nal spine was measured at the cranial portion of this process. Within tinamous, the spina interna is narrow only in the genus Crypturellus and a
few other species (e.g. Nothoprocta cinerascens). With the exception of Galliformes, this charac- ter was scored as not comparable for the out- group because these taxa lack an internal spine (character 59).
62. + Sternum, cranial projection of the spina interna rostri (Fig. 8): markedly elongate, markedly pro- truding cranially (0); variably developed (1); sig- nificantly short, measuring less than half of the length of the processus craniolateralis (2). In Eudromia and Tinamotis this process is particu- larly short; by contrast, it is clearly elongate in Tinamus. Out-group taxa without spina interna rostri were coded as non-comparable for this character.
63. – Sternum, spina interna in ventral view, strong- ly concave cranial edge (Fig. 8): absent (0); present (1). Taoniscus nanus and some species of the genus Nothoprocta, Nothocercus, and Rhynchotus show a characteristic spina interna with a deeply concave cranial border, and have been tentative- ly identified as the area of attachment for the membrana sternocoracoclavicularis (Baumel et al., 1993).
64. – Sternum, carina: absent (0); present (1). Cracraft (1974: 503) suggested the loss of this keel to be derived within Neornithes.
65. – Clavicles fused to form a furcula (Fig. 8): absent (0); present (1). The furcula in Lithornis and in most Tinamidae is U-shaped (Bertelli, 2002).
66. – Furcula (Fig. 8): robust and thick sternal end (0); weak and thin sternal end (1). The sternal end of some species of Nothoprocta and Rhynchotus is distinctly thinner than the scapular portion (state 1), as opposed to a robust condition as in most tinamous. A robust, U-shaped furcula has been described for tinamous by Parker (1866). This character was scored as non-comparable for out- group taxa without a furcula. In Galliformes this condition was coded as robust (0) because the sternal end of the furcula is thick, irrespective of the presence of a median apophysis (hypocleideum).
67. – Scapula (Fig. 8): separated from coracoid (0); fused to coracoid (1). Mayr (2011: character 68) coded the presence or absence of scapulocoracoid fusion.
68. – Scapula, caudal half of blade (Fig. 8): expand- ing distally, with a blunt club-like extremity (0); distal expansion reduced, generally broadest at midline and tapering distally (1). After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 16). The scapula of the fossil tinamou Nothura parvula is almost completely preserved, with approximately the same width throughout its length, thus we suggest the scoring for this character as 1.
PHYLOGENETIC INTERRELATIONSHIPS OF TINAMOUS 175
 © 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
176 S. BERTELLI ET AL.
 69. + Coracoid, omal end, dorsal foramen below cotyla scapularis (Fig. 9): not excavated (0); ves- tigial, poorly developed (1); well developed, large opening (2). After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: char- acter 18). Mayr and Clarke (2003) were uncer- tain about whether this structure was homologous to the supracoracoid nerve foramen, a structure that channels the n. supracoracoideus through the body of the coracoid, in some birds. Nonethe- less, because the supracoracoid nerve foramen needs to pass through the coracoid for this nerve to innervate the m. supracoracoideus (Baumel, 1993) and the opening described by the present character does not traverse the entire body of the bone, these two structures cannot be homolo- gous. Within tinamous, this foramen is most likely to be homologous (does not traverse the body of the coracoid), and it is a well-developed opening, except in Taoniscus nanus, which show an almost vestigial foramen. This foramen is visible in the coracoid of the fossil tinamous MACN-SC-10, MACN-SC-13, Nothura parvula, Eudromia olsoni, Nothura sp. and Eudromia sp., and therefore these taxa were scored as 2.
70. – Coracoid, shape of the facies articularis clavicularis in medial view (Fig. 9): circular to ovate (0); crescent shaped, with overhanging tuberculum brachiale protruding ventromedially (1). After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 19). This character occurs in Tinamus, Crypturellus, and Eudromia. Ratites were scored as non-comparable (and following characters 70–74) because both scapula and coracoid are fused, obscuring the mor- phology of the proximal end of the coracoid. Eudromia olsoni and the early Miocene coracoids show a crescent-shaped facies articularis (1), whereas it is ovate in the extinct Nothura parvula and Nothura sp. (0).
71. – Coracoid, groove for origin of ligamentum acrocoracohumerale, confluence with facies articularis clavicularis (Fig. 9): separated (0); con- fluent (1). After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: char- acter 20). This character is not related to the presence of a tuberculum brachiale (character 69; e.g. also occurs in Tinamotis and Nothoprocta cinerascens), and was scored as not comparable for all ratites included here because these taxa lack a facies articularis clavicularis. The early Miocene remains of MACN-SC-10 share with the extinct species of Eudromia (Eudromia sp. and Eudromia olsoni) a confluence of groove for ligamentum acrocoracohumerale and facies articularis clavicularis (1); whereas this condition is absent in the fossil species of Nothura (Nothura sp. and Nothura parvula) and MACN-SC-13.
72. – Coracoid, distinctly protruding processus acrocoracoideus (cranial projection relative to the facies articularis humeralis) (Fig. 9): present (0); absent (1). After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: char- acter 21). The coracoid lacks a cranially project- ed processus acrocoracoideus in Crypturellus, Eudromia, and Tinamotis. Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: characters 23 and 25) discussed the de- velopment and medial expansion of the processus acrocoracoideus within Tinamidae; however, we discarded these characters in view of its pos- sibly continuous nature. After further study, we also found that the presence of a distinctive scar on the ventral surface of processus acrocoracoideus (Bertelli and Chiappe, 2005: character 22) is often indistinguishable or highly variable, and thus it was excluded from the analysis. Eudromia olsoni, and the oldest tinamous MACN-SC-10 and MACN- SC-13 lack a protruding processus acrocoracoideus (1), as opposed to other fossil tinamous (Nothura parvula, Nothura sp., and Eudromia sp.), where this process is well projected cranially (0).
73. – Coracoid, proximal margin of cotyla scapularis with pneumatic openings (Fig. 9): absent or few small foramina (0); perforated with large fo- ramina (1). After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005, char- acter 24). Pneumatization of this area is present in the living Crypturellus, Eudromia, Tinamotis, and the extinct taxa Eudromia olsoni, Nothura sp., MACN-SC-10, and MACN-SC-13.
74. – Coracoid, facies articularis scapularis (Fig. 9): shallow (0), excavated and cuplike (1). See Bertelli et al. (2011: character 37). As in extant Galliformes, the cotyla scapularis is shallow in all fossil and extant Tinamidae.
75. – Coracoid, base of processus procoracoideus, medial edge, distinctly projected crest (Fig. 9): absent (0); present (1). Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 26) discriminated three states of the crest development in tinamous; however, we con- sidered the projection of this crest as a continu- ous character, only being able to corroborate the variation in the presence and absence in our sample. This crest is clearly delimitated in most tinamous (with the exception of Tinamus and Nothocercus) and the fossil taxa Eudromia sp., Nothura sp., and Nothura parvula.
76. + Coracoid, processus lateralis, dorsal view (Fig. 9): poorly developed or absent (0); devel- oped, shorter or similar than sternal facet (1); well developed, distinctly longer than sternal facet, three-pointed sternal end (2). Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 28) distinguished the relative de- velopment of this process relative to the caudal width of the sternal facet to accommodate the greater variation seen in Tinamidae; only
© 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
Nothocercus lacks a distinct projected processus lateralis. Clarke (2004) described the presence of a developed lateral process in Ichthyornis. Al- though damaged, enough of the sternal end area is preserved to show that Eudromia sp. and Nothura parvula have a developed processus lateralis, and therefore were coded as (1/2).
77. + Coracoid, dorsal surface of distal end, im- pression for the m. sternocoracoidei: not pneumatized (0); only few openings developed (1); strongly pneumatized (2). Bertelli and Chiappe (2005, character 29) recognized only two condi- tions for this character that described the pres- ence of pneumatic openings on the dorsal surface of the coracoid of some tinamous (e.g. most species of Nothura and Nothoprocta). We have added an additional state for this character to account for the strong pneumatization in the out-group taxa. These pneumatic openings are clearly absent in most extinct tinamous (with the exception of Nothura parvula).
78. – Humerus, ulna, radius, and carpometacarpus: well-developed separate elements (0); reduced or vestigial (1). These elements are reduced or ves- tigial in the out-group taxa Apteryx and Rhea.
79. – Humerus, incisura capitis obstructed by a tu- bercle projecting from the border of humeral head (Ericson, 1997: character 54; Fig. 9): absent (0); present (1). Livezey (1997: character 203) de- scribed the presence of a similar tubercle as the insertion of m. scapulohumeralis cranialis in some gruiforms. The presence in the forest tinamou Crypturellus of an incisura capitis enclosed by a distal projection of caput humeri was described by Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 30). This condition is also present in Galliformes. Because of its highly apomorphic morphology (character 77), the humerus of ratites cannot be coded for this character (and the following characters 79– 81). Eudromia olsoni and Nothura parvula lack this tubercle on the caudal surface of the humerus.
80. + Humerus, crista bicipitalis, aspect in caudal view (Fig. 9): rounded, continuously curving (0); intermediate between squared off and rounded (1); distinctly squared off (generally with a hook- shaped extension) (2). Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 31) observed some variation in the degree of development among the specimens pos- sessing a hook-shaped extension; however, after further examination of a more extensive sample, we do not consider this to be justification for an additional character state. Because the state as- signment requires the presence of a crista bicipitalis, ratites were scored as non-comparable. Both Eudromia olsoni and Nothura parvula exibit a markedly squared off crista bicipitalis (2).
81. – Humerus, pneumatic foramina at bottom of fossa pneumotricipitalis (or corresponding area in taxa without such fossa) (Fig. 9): absent (0), present (1) (Mayr, 2011: character 77). Within tinamous (including the extinct taxa Nothura parvula and Eudromia olsoni), this opening is only absent in Taoniscus.
82. – Humerus, foramen pneumaticum surround- ed by osseous ring or muscular scar (Fig. 9): no (0); yes (1). After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: char- acter 33). Nothura, Nothoprocta, and Rhynchotus show a distinct muscular mark bordering the fossa pneumotricipitalis ventralis. We consider this char- acter non-comparable for taxa lacking a pneu- matic fossa. In caudal view, the foramen pneumaticum is bounded by a muscular scar in Nothura parvula (1); Eudromia olsoni lacks this condition (0).
83. – Humerus, ventral condyle, length of main axis relative to that of dorsal condyle, cranial aspect (Fig. 9): shorter or subequal (0); longer (1). Our scorings differ from Bertelli and Chiappe (2005, character 36); we corroborated that all but one tinamou genera (Tinamotis) show a shorter ventral condyle (relative to the dorsal counterpart). This character (state 1) occurs in most Tinamidae and is also present in Nothura parvula and the early Miocene MACN-SC-H (1).
84. – Humerus, shallow and crescent-like impres- sion for insertion of musculus brachialis (Fig. 9): no (0); yes (1). A sharply delimited impression brachialis occurs in most out-group taxa (with the exception of Ichthyornis). Because of its highly apomorphic morphology, the humerus of Apteryx and Rhea cannot be coded for this character. In Nothura parvula and MACN-SC-H the impres- sion of musculus brachialis is a clearly flat scar (1).
85. – Humerus, processus supracondylaris dorsalis developed as a rounded and compact tubercle (Fig. 9): absent (0); present (1). A blunt process on the dorsal border of the distal humerus is found in most out-group taxa (with the exception of Ichthyornis). Nothura parvula and MACN- SC-H show a rounded and well-projected processus supracondylaris dorsalis (1).
86. – Humerus, processus supracondylaris ventralis (attachment of musculus pronator brevis of Howard, 1929), position (Fig. 9): on ventral surface or cranioventral margin (0); more cranially located (1). Nothura parvula and MACN-SC-H were coded as 0.
87. – Humerus, processus flexorius, distal prolon- gation viewed cranioventrallly (Fig. 9): absent (0); projects beyond the ventral condyle (1). This process does not project beyond the ventral
PHYLOGENETIC INTERRELATIONSHIPS OF TINAMOUS 177
 © 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
178 S. BERTELLI ET AL.
 condyle in Nothura parvula and MACN-SC-H
(0).
88. – Ulna/humerus proportions: about the same
length (0); ulna distinctly longer than humerus (1); ulna shorter than humerus (2). Mayr (2011: character 82). The ulna only exceeds the humerus in length in Tinamus, Tinamotis, and Eudromia among tinamous, and is only shorter in Taoniscus. The ulna of Tinamotis pentlandii is distinctly longer than that of Tinamotis ingoufi. Pre- served ulnae and humeri show similar propor- tions in Nothura parvula (0).
89. – Radius, distal end, expansion in ventral view (Fig. 9): distal end with curved aspect, one side more projected than the other (0); distal end wide, both sides expanded (1). The distal end of the radius of Tinamotis is typically expanded. Nothura parvula lacks this distal expansion (0).
90. – Carpometacarpus, fossa on ventral surface of proximal end, caudal to pisciform process (Fig. 9): absent or shallow (0); very deep (1). Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 43). This fossa is ten- tatively identified as the attachment for the ligamentum ulnocarpometacarpale ventralis (Baumel, 1993), and is extremely deep in most tinamous (including the fossil Nothura parvula) except for Nothocercus, where it varies from being virtually absent to deep. Because of its highly apomorphic morphology, the carpometacarpus of ratites cannot be coded for this character (and following character 86).
91. – Carpometacarpus, trochlea carpalis (Fig. 9): caudal rim of ventral portion with deep notch, shallow fossa infratrochlearis (0); caudal rim of ventral portion weakly notched or notch absent, deep and well-defined infratrochlear pit (1). The caudal rim of the ventral portion is clearly rounded with a distinct infratrochlear pit (tentatively iden- tified as the attachment for the lig. radiocarpometacarpale ventralis; Baumel, 1993) in Nothura, Taoniscus, Nothoprocta, and the extinct taxa Nothura parvula (state 1).
92. + Ilium, dorsal surface, relative length of cranial and caudal portions, separated by the crista dorsolateralis ilii in dorsal view (Fig. 10), and by the acetabular area in lateral view (Fig. 10): cranial portion shorter than caudal portion (0); por- tions approximately of similar length or subequal (1); praeacetabular region distinctly longer than caudal portion, but less than twice the length of the latter (2); praeacetabular region around twice or more than twice the length of the postacetabular portion (3). Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: charac- ter 44) discriminated three states of relative length of praeacetabular and postacetabular iliac por- tions that we were able to corroborate in our
sample (states 1, 2, and 3). A third condition, praeacetabular portion shorter (0), is typical of the out-group taxa.
93. – Pelvis, shape of the crista iliaca dorsalis at the acetabular area, dorsal view (Fig. 10): straight line or only slightly curved (0); markedly curved (1). The crista iliaca dorsalis is slightly curved in Eudromia and Tinamotis, but not as distinct- ly concave as in Rhynchotus, Nothoprocta, Nothura, and Taoniscus (condition 1), and thus the char- acter was scored as 0. We scored Rhea and Apteryx as not comparable for this character.
94. – Pelvis, ala praeacetabularis ilii, cranial end rounded and markedly expanded laterally (Fig. 10): absent (0); present (1). The pelvis of the open- area tinamous (except for Tinamotis and Eudromia) and Nothocercus share a characteristic lateral pro- jection of the ala praeacetabularis ilii.
95. + Pelvis, ilium, and ischium (Fig. 10): broadly fused, small fenestra present (0); fused over only a short distance, large fenestra present (1); not fused, fenestra open (2). Cracraft (1974: p. 503) considered the presence of a large, or open, fenestra a synapomorphy of ratites (see also Mayr 2011: character 94).
96. – Pelvis, ventral surface of postacetabular ilium (Fig. 10): ilioischiatic membrane attaches to ventrolateral edge of ilium (0); ridge for attach- ment of ilioischiatic membrane inset medially from lateral edge of ilium (1). fig. 12 in Houde (1988) described the development of a ventral ridge for the attachment of the ilioischiadic membrane in Lithornis. This lamina is also present in the Tinamidae (Bertelli, 2002).
97. – Ilium pars postacetabularis, caudal end mark- edly extended with ‘tail’-like aspect (Fig. 10): absent or poorly developed (0); present (1). This char- acter was considered not comparable for most out- group taxa (except Lithornis), which exhibit a broadly fused ilium and ischium. The caudal end of the ventral surface of the postacetabular ilium together with the synsacrum projects caudally in some open-area tinamous such as Rhynchotus, Nothoprocta, Nothura, and Taoniscus. In Eudromia, only a small flange is markedly less projected, and the taxon was thus scored as 0.
98. – Pelvis, maximum width (measurement at level of the acetabular area related to the cranial end of the praeacetabular area in dorsal view; Fig. 10): slightly wider (0); or nearly twice as wide as the praeacetabular width (1). The pelvis of Tinamotis is distinctly wider than the pelvis in other tinamous.
99. + Pubis, tuberculum praeacetabulare: absent or poorly developed, length shorter than acetabu- lum size (0); developed, approximately the same
© 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
size or slightly larger than the acetabulum (1); well projected, distinctly larger than acetabulum (2) (Mayr, 2011: character 93; Fig. 10). We ob- served variation in the degree of development of the tuberculum praeacetabulare among the speci- mens, and considered three character states. A well-developed tuberculum is typical of the forest tinamous (state 1), whereas a distinctly elongate process is present in the open-area genera (state 2). A third condition, praeacetabular portion shorter (0), is typical of the out-group taxa. This tubercle is small in Lithornis (Houde, 1988: fig. 21).
100. + Femur, development of the crista trochanteris (Fig. 11): little or no cranial projection (0); some- what projected, but curved and medially direct- ed, shallow fossa trochanteris (1); projects markedly, deep fossa (2). The variation of the degree of projection of the crista trochanteris fits into two different conditions within Tinamidae (states 1 and 2), the fossil Nothura parvula show a moderately projected crista trochanteris. A third condition, slight cranial projection (0), is typical of the out-group taxa.
101. + Femur/tarsometatarsus proportions: tarsometatarsus significantly longer than femur (0); about the same length as the femur (1); shorter than the femur (2); significantly shorter than the femur, does not reach the articular area distally (3). Worthy and Holdaway (2002: character 64) noted that the tarsometatarsus is longer than the femur in Rhea. We distinguish four states in this character. The tarsometatarsus of Ichthyornis is incompletely known. Although the only femur of Nothura parvula available to us was incomplete, the length of the preserved portion of this species indicates that the tarsometatarsus is compara- tively much shorter than the femur (3).
102. – Femur, condylus medialis, articular surface in medial view (Fig. 11): proximal terminus of cranial rim much farther proximal than proximal ter- minus of caudal rim (0); proximal terminus of cranial rim subequal to proximal terminus of caudal rim (1). We distinguished two alterna- tive conditions for the shape of the condylus medialis in medial view. The presence of a flat- tened surface is the most widely distributed con- dition within the taxa examined; only Tinamotis, Eudromia, and the extinct Eudromia olsoni show a sharply concave condylus medialis (state 1). Nothura parvula lacks this condition.
103. – Femur, markedly bowed (Fig. 11): absent (0); present (1). Among tinamous, Nothoprocta and Rhynchotus exhibit a strongly curved shaft; it is comparatively straight in other tinamou groups. This condition is absent in Nothura parvula.
104. – Tibiotarsus, condylus lateralis and medialis, relative length (Fig. 11): condylus lateralis dis- tinctly longer (0); condylus lateralis subequal or slightly longer than medialis (1). Our scoring differs from Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: charac- ter 53); we consider a subequal condylus lateralis the same condition as the slightly longer than condylus medialis. The forest tinamous exhibit an elongated condylus lateralis (state 0), which, unlike the open-area groups, is relatively longer than the tarsometatarsus. Variation in the rela- tive width of the condylus lateralis and medialis for tinamous was also described by Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 51); however, after further study of a more extensive sample, we found no substantial differences among species of Tinamidae. Condition 1 is present in the fossil Nothura parvula and MACN-SC-T. We consider the highly derived morphology of the condyles of Rhea to be non-comparable for this character.
105. – Tibiotarsus, crista cnemialis cranialis (Fig. 11): distinctly longer in the proximodistal direction than crista cnemialis lateralis (0); short, similar distal projection relative to the crista cnemialis lateralis (1). The crista cnemialis cranialis of most tinamous (and out-groups) is relatively longer than the crista cnemialis lateralis (state 0); the alternative con- dition (state 1) occurs only in Eudromia, Tinamotis (Bertelli and Chiappe, 2005: character 48), and the extinct Eudromia olsoni; Nothura parvula lacks this condition.
106. – Tibiotarsus, sulcus extensorius, distinct medial location (Fig. 11): absent (0); present (1) (Ericson, 1997: character 44). In tinamous (including the fossil taxa Nothura parvula and MACN-SC-T), ratites, and Lithornis, the groove that houses the tendon for the extensor muscles of the digits is displaced towards the medial margin of the bone (Parker, 1866; Pycraft, 1900). This condition is different from the condition seen in most neognaths, where the groove is normally located towards the centre of the shaft.
107. – Tibiotarsus, pons supratendineus (Fig. 11): absent (0), present (1) (Mayr 2011: character 100). This feature was coded as present in Apteryx by Mayr (2011) and Lee et al. (1997), but absent in Apteryx by Bledsoe (1988). As Cracraft (1974: 500) discussed, the supratendinal bridge occasion- ally does not ossify completely in Apteryx, and so is coded as variable in this analysis. A pons supratendineus is present in Tinamidae and also preserved in the extinct Nothura parvula and MACN-SC-T.
108. – Tibiotarsus, condylus lateralis, shape in cranial view (Fig. 11): proximal margin angular, widens distally (0); elongated with rounded proximal end
PHYLOGENETIC INTERRELATIONSHIPS OF TINAMOUS 179
 © 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
180 S. BERTELLI ET AL.
 (1); short with a more rounded aspect (2). Our scorings differ from Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 52); we consider the highly derived condyle morphology of Rhea to be non-comparable for this character. In most tinamous (including the fossil taxa Nothura parvula and MACN-SC-T), the shape of the condylus lateralis remains elongated along its entire length when viewed in cranial aspect, with a rounded proximal end (state 1). This con- dition differs from that present in Tinamus, where the condyle is more pointed and widens distally, being somewhat triangular in shape (state 0), and also differs from Tinamotis, which has a short and rounded condyle (state 2).
109. – Tarsometatarsus, hypotarsus, general shape, and distal extension of hypotarsal ridges rela- tive to foramina vascularia proximalia (Fig. 12): truncated and squared off, ending approximate- ly at level of or proximal to foramina (0); acuminated, ending markedly distal to foramina (1). After Bertelli and Chiappe (2005: character 63). Nothocercus and Tinamus major share the presence of a distally truncated hypotarsus with several out-group taxa (e.g. Galliformes, among others); the alternative condition (state 1) is present in other extant tinamous and the fossil Nothura parvula.
110. – Tarsometatarsus, hypotarsus (Fig. 12): with several well-developed cristae intermediae (0); one well-developed, proximally prominent crista (and a low ridge, if present) (1). Because the posi- tional homology of these ridges is uncertain, we code only the number of prominent ridges. Nothura parvula shows a hypotarsus with a developed crista (1).
111. + Tarsometatarsus, hypotarsus, hypotarsal sulcus/ canal for m. flexor digitorum longus, proximal view (Fig. 12): developed as a broad, plantary open sulcus, without medially bordering cristae (0); developed as a broad, plantarly open sulcus that is sepa- rated by distinct cristae (1); nearly enclosed canal (2); fully enclosed canal (3). The degree of aper- ture of the sulcus/canal for m. flexor digitorum longus varies within Tinamidae, from a nearly closed canal in the forest groups (state 2) to a broader, plantary open sulcus in the open-area groups (states 0 and 1); the latter group shares this condition with Rhea, Apteryx, and Lithornis. Nothura parvula shares with extant open-area tinamous the presence of a broad sulcus (1).
112. – Tarsometatarsus, hypotarsus, sharp medial ridge at cotyla medialis (Fig. 12): present (0); absent (1) (Bledsoe, 1988: character 69). This ridge is present in most Tinamidae (including the fossil taxa Nothura parvula) and Lithornis (Houde 1988: 23); it is only absent in Eudromia.
113. – Tarsometatarsus, fossa parahypotarsalis lateralis (Fig. 12): shallow (0); marked and deeply excavated (1). Nothura parvula lacks a deep fossa parahypotarsalis lateralis (0).
114. – Tarsometatarsus, foramen vasculare distale (Fig. 12): well developed (0); vestigial, almost com- pletely closed (1). The foramen is only reduced in Tinamotis, among the sample examined. This condition is absent in Nothura parvula.
115. + Tarsometatarsus, distal trochleae, relative distal extension of trochleae metatarsorum II and IV (Fig. 12): trochlea metatarsi II more distally proj- ected than trochlea metatarsi IV (0); both trochleae about equally projected distally, distal ends of incisurae intertrochleares lateralis medialis et lateralis leveled (1); trochlea metatarsi II slight- ly less distally projected than trochlea meta- tarsi IV, but reaching distally beyond as proximal margin of incisura interterochlearis lateralis (2); trochlea metatarsi II much less distally project- ed than trochlea metatarsi IV, without reaching proximal margin of incisura interterochlearis lateralis (3). Within Tinamidae, the distal end of trochlea metatarsi II is at approximately the same level as that of trochlea metatarsi IV only in Tinamotis (state 1), and it is comparable to that of Apteryx; by contrast, the trochlea metatarsi II is shorter (state 2) in Eudromia, Taoniscus, and Nothura (including the fossil Nothura parvula), or is distinctly less projected than trochlea meta- tarsi IV in the forest tinamous and Rhynchotus and Nothoprocta (state 3).
116. + Hallux, development (Mayr 2011: character 110 modified): absent (0); greatly reduced, measur- ing less than half of the length of the proximal phalanx of third toe) (1); long (2). A hallux is com- pletely reduced only in Eudromia and Tinamotis, whereas in all other tinamous it is present but short (state 1). Although the hallux is not pre- served, it is possible to score its presence in Nothura parvula (12), as the fossa metatarsi I is clearly developed on the distal end of the tarsometatarsus.
117. – Ligamentum orbitoquadratum (Elzanowski, 1987): absent (0); present (1). According to Elzanowski (1987; fig. 50A–D), this ligament tying the processus orbitalis of the quadrate to the brain- case only occurs in tinamous.
118. – Ligamentum postorbitale, origin: frontal part of the processus postorbitalis (0); pleurosphenoid part of the process (1); ossiculum postorbitalis (covers the frontal and pleurosphenoid parts of the process) (2). In tinamous (and most ratites, except for Apteryx), the insertion of this ligament occurs in the jugal bar and is probably related to the move- ment of the upper mandible (Elzanowski, 1987).
© 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
119. – Ligamentum jugomandibulare internum: absent (0); present (1). This typical ligament of the avian head is absent in tinamous (Elzanowski, 1987).
120. – Ligamentum jugomandibulare externum, in- sertion: undivided (0); bipartite (1). Only in Crypturellus does this ligament bifurcate at the end, and thus the insertion at the supraangular area of the mandible is clearly bipartite (Elzanowski, 1987). The ligamentum jugomandibulare externum is present in all birds except for Galliformes and Anhimidae (Dzerzhinskii, 1983), therefore these taxa were coded as non-comparable for this character.
121. – Ligamentum quadratomandibulare rostrale: absent (0); present (1). This ligament (from the body of the quadrate to the mandible) is well de- veloped in most tinamous except for Nothoprocta and Tinamotis (Elzanowski, 1987).
122. + Ligamentum quadratomandibulare rostrale: extensive, not divided (0); bipartite, with medial and lateral parts (1); only medial part present (2). Both medial and lateral parts of this liga- ment are developed in Crypturellus. Only the medial part of this ligament is present in Tinamus, and the lateral part is present in Nothura and Eudromia; an extensive ligament that occupies the position of both parts (lateral and medial) occurs in Rhynchotus (Elzanowski, 1987). Because of the absence of this structure, the condition for Nothoprocta and Tinamotis was coded as non-comparable.
123. – Ligamentum sphenomandibulare: absent (0); present (1). This tendinous band that connects the mandible with the lamina parasphenoidalis is found, among tinamous, only in Tinamus and Eudromia (Elzanowski, 1987).
124. + Aponeurosis parabasalis, attachment: to postmeatic area (0); to both the postmeatic area and lamina basitemporalis (1); to lamina basitemporalis (2). According to Webb (1957) the aponeurosis parabasalis is present in Rhea among the out-group taxa, with attachment on the postmeatic area of the ala tympanica caudalis, on the occipital surface of the skull. Among tinamous, a postmeatic attachment was also de- scribed for Crypturellus and Tinamus (Elzanowski, 1987). Unlike these taxa, the attachment is ex- clusively (or at least mainly) to the basal plate (lamina basitemporalis) in Eudromia, Tinamotis, Rhynchotus, and Nothoprocta; an intermediate state is present in Nothura that combines both conditions equally (Elzanowski, 1987).
125. – Musculus adductor mandibulae externus, pars caudalis: absent (0); present (1). The m. adductor mandibulae externus of most birds is divided into four parts: superficialis, medialis, profunda, and
caudalis. In most tinamous (except for Tinamus and Crypturellus), the pars caudalis is absent (Elzanowski, 1987).
126. – Musculus adductor mandibulae externus, origin on temporal fossa: absent (0); present (1). The cranial origin of this muscle is limited to the processus zygomaticus in most tinamous (and ratites), with the exception of Eudromia and Tinamotis, the area of origin of which extends onto the braincase (Elzanowski, 1987).
127. – Musculus adductor mandibulae externus, parajugal branch of pars profunda: absent (0); present (1). This branch is absent in Nothura, Nothoprocta, and Rhynchotus among tinamous (Elzanowski, 1987).
128. + Musculus adductor mandibulae externus, pars profunda, and superficialis: fused (0); partially separated (1); separated (2). In Rhynchotus and Nothoprocta, the m. adductor mandibulae externus is partially tripartite (with pars superficialis and pars profunda partially fused state 1); alterna- tively, it is bipartite (pars superficialis and profunda fused into pars rostralis, state 0) in Eudromia, Tinamotis, and Nothura, and tripar- tite (condition 2) in Crypturellus and Tinamus (Elzanowski, 1987).
129. – Musculus intramandibularis: absent (0); present (1). The m. intramandibularis is part of the pseudotemporalis complex, and it is only present in Tinamus, Nothura, Rhynchotus, and Nothoprocta (with the exception of Nothoprocta cinerascens) (Elzanowski, 1987).
130. – Musculus pseudotemporalis, ventral tempo- ral portion: absent (0); present (1). The m. pseudotemporalis originates from the temporal fossa and inserts to the medial surface of the man- dible (George and Berger, 1966). The subdivi- sion of this muscle into three portions (two pars orbitales and one pars temporalis) is a general- ized character in tinamous (and also in most ratites), in which the temporal fossa is almost entirely occupied by the m. pseudotemporalis (Elzanowski, 1987). In Tinamus, Crypturellus, and Nothura, the origin extends ventrally onto the pleuroesphenoid area (ventral head) (Elzanowski, 1987). The presence of a ventral head of pars temporalis was also described for several neognathous birds (Elzanowski, 1987).
131. – Musculus pseudotemporalis, attachment to os suprangulare: absent (0); present (1). In tinamous, the insertion of this muscle occurs on the tuberculum pseudotemporale of the mandible, near the processus medialis mandibularis; only in Crypturellus is it also attached to the os supraangulare (on the dorsal area of the tuberculum) (Elzanowski, 1987).
PHYLOGENETIC INTERRELATIONSHIPS OF TINAMOUS 181
 © 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
182 S. BERTELLI ET AL.
 132. – Musculus pseudotemporalis and m. quadratomandibularis, complete or almost com- plete separation: absent (0); present (1). In most tinamous (except for Eudromia and Tinamotis), these muscles are connected both at the origin and insertion (Elzanowski, 1987).
133. – Musculus quadratomandibularis, insertion: beyond the dorsal margin of the mandible (0); does not extend so far dorsally (1). The m. quadratomandibularis attaches on the medial surface of the mandible of tinamous (fossa caudalis mandibulae), and extends beyond the dorsal margin of the mandible in Rhynchotus, Eudromia, Tinamotis, and Nothoprocta (state 0); the alternative condition (state 1) is present in Tinamus, Nothura, and Crypturellus (Elzanowski, 1987).
134. – Musculus quadratomandibularis, aspect at origin: thin, superficial aponeurosis (0); strong aponeurotic sheet (1). The origin of m. quadratomandibularis of tinamous from the processus orbitalis of the quadrate is weak, except in Eudromia, which exhibit a strong aponeurosis (Elzanowski, 1987).
135. – Musculus pterygoideus, pars medialis: sepa- rated into three unnipennate portions (0); complex multipennate system (1). This muscle (includ- ing the pseudotemporalis profundus and depres- sor mandibulae) participates in the movement (closing) of the mandible (Baumel, 1993). In tinamous, it is subdivided into pars medialis and lateralis (Elzanowski, 1987: fig. 53). The mor- phology of the pars medialis shows two differ- ent patterns in tinamous: Tinamus, Crypturellus, and Nothura have three well-separated unnipenate portions, whereas in Rhynchotus, Nothoprocta, Tinamotis, and Eudromia these portions are inter- connected, forming a multipennate pars medialis (Elzanowski, 1987).
136. – Musculus pterygoideus, fasciculus caudalis: absent (0); present (1). Absent in Nothura, Tinamus, and Crypturellus (Elzanowski, 1987).
137. – Musculus pterygoideus, pars medialis en- closed in aponeurotic sheath: absent (0); present (1). In Norhoprocta and Rhynchotus, all dorsal and ventral aponeuroses are fused, enclosing pars medialis in a conspicuous aponeuroric sheath (Elzanowski, 1987).
138. – Musculus protractor pterygoidei et quadrati: undivided (0); bipartite (1). In most tinamous (except for Tinamus and Crypturellus), the m. pro- tractor et quadrati consist of two parts: pars superficialis and pars profunda. No division of this muscle has been described for ratites (Elzanowski, 1987).
139. – Musculus depressor mandibulae externus, insertion: on fossa caudalis mandibularis (0); ex-
tending beyond fossa caudalis (1) (Elzanowski,
1987).
140. – Musculus columellae, perforated by n.
glossopharyngealis et vagi: absent (0); present (1). Only in Nothura and Nothoprocta is this muscle peforated by the exit of the n. glossopharyngealis et vagi (Elzanowski, 1987).
141. – Musculus levator palpebrae dorsalis, muscu- lar portion: well developed (0); poorly devel- oped, thin layer (1). In Nothura, Nothoprocta, and Rhynchotus, this muscle consists of a well- developed proximal muscular part and an exten- sive fascial sheet (fascia supraocularis; Elzanowski, 1987). In other groups, the proximal part is much thinner and semitransparent.
142. – Musculus levator palpebrae dorsalis, origin from os ectethmoidale: absent (0); present (1). Only in Eudromia and Tinamotis is there a rostral at- tachment of the m. levator palpebrae dorsalis (Elzanowski, 1987).
143. – Musculus orbicularis palpebrarum, morphol- ogy: muscular fibres (0); ligament (1). A replace- ment of muscular fibres by elastic ligaments in m. orbicularis palpebrarum occurs in Eudromia and Tinamotis (Elzanowski, 1987).
144. – Musculus orbicularis palpebrarum, origin from ossicula supraorbitales: absent (0); present (1). Crypturellus, Tinamus, Eudromia, Nothocercus, and some species of Nothoprocta share the pres- ence of the ossiculum supraorbitalis on the dorsal surface of the area interorbitalis; however, the origin of the m. orbicularis palpebrarum from these ossicles has been described only for Crypturellus (Elzanowski, 1987). This character has been coded as non-comparable for other tinamous (without ossiculum supraorbitalis).
145. – Musculus depressor palpebrae ventralis: well developed (0); vestigial (1). In Tinamus and Crypturellus, the m. depressor palpebrae ventralis is vestigial and fused to the m. tensor periorbitae. By contrast, in other tinamous both muscles are well developed (Elzanowski, 1987).
146. + Musculus obliquus dorsalis, origin: muscle un- divided (0); divided into two parts (1); divided into three parts (2). The m. obliquus dorsalis shows at the origin three morphological patterns among tinamous. The condition present in Nothura and Rhynchotus is characterized by the division of the muscle into two parts, and three in Nothoprocta, whereas the origin is undivided in the other genera (Elzanowski, 1987).
147. – Musculus coracobrachialis cranialis, enor- mously developed: absent (0); present (1). This muscle originates on the processus acrocoracoideus of the coracoid and inserts on the cranial surface of the humerus. The large size of the m.
© 2014 The Linnean Society of London, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2014, 172, 145–184
coracobrachialis cranialis is a distinct feature of tinamous, exceeding that found in any other group of birds (Hudson et al., 1972).
148. – Musculus deltoideus, pars minor, caput ventrale fused to m. supracoracoideus: absent (0); present (1). The caput ventrale of this muscle, which origi- nates from the m. sternocoracoclavicularis and inserts on the crista deltopectoralis of the humerus (Baumel, 1993), is over most of its length com- pletely fused to the m. supracoracoideus in tinamous, being separated only at the triosseal canal (Hudson et al., 1972).
149. – Musculus latissimus dorsi, pars caudalis, origin extensive: absent (0); present, attached to two ribs (1); very extensive, attached to four ribs (2). The large size of the pars caudalis of m. latissimus dorsi (= m. latissimus dorsi posterior of Hudson et al., 1972), with an extensive origin, is typical of tinamous and a few other groups (e.g. loons, auks, penguins; Hudson et al., 1972). Tinamous show two different conditions: in Tinamus and Crypturellus, the origin is very extensive, between the musculus serratus superficialis, pars metapatagialis and pars caudalis, including the second to fifth ribs, and the cranial area of the ilium. The alternative condition and the most gen- eralized is a less extensive surface of origin, in- cluding only the fourth and fifth ribs and the cranial area of the ilium. This character was con- sidered ordered.
150. – Musculus latissimus dorsi, pars metapatagialis, relative position to the m. serratus superficialis: over dorsal surface (0); adjacent (1). The pars metapatagialis of m. latissimus is very rare among birds (Baumel, 1993), and, if present, inserts into the humeral feather tract with pars metapatagialis of m. serratus superficialis. This uncommon muscle is present in tinamous, and lies adjacent to the m. serratus superficialis in Crypturellus, Tinamus, and Eudromia, whereas it passes over the dorsal surface of this muscle in other tinamous (Hudson et al., 1972).
151. – Musculus interosseus dorsalis, insertion: un- divided (0); divided (1). This muscle, together with the m. interosseus ventralis, fills the intermetacarpal space (Baumel, 1993). A double tendon for insertion to phalanx II and III (origin from the dorsal surface of the carpometacarpus and metacarpals II and III), is a typical feature of tinamous (Hudson et al., 1972).
152. + Musculus ulnimetacarpalis dorsalis, origin: only dorsal head present (0); bipartite, small ventral head (1); bipartite, large ventral and dorsal head (2). The origin of this muscle on the distal end of the ulna of tinamous is divided into a large ventral and dorsal head in Tinamus and Crypturellus, the ventral head is poorly devel- oped in other tinamous (and completly absent in Tinamotis). The m. ulnimetacarpalis dorsalis is vestigial in Apteryx (McGowan, 1982), and was coded as non-comparable for this character.
153. Musculus supinator, distinctly longer: absent (0); present (1). This muscle is much longer in Tinamus and Crypturellus (Hudson et al., 1972).
154. – Musculi iliotrochanterici cranialis and medius: separated (0); fused (1). The m. iliotrochanterici, related to protraction movements of the femur, originate on the praeacetabular ilium and insert on the trochanter femoris (Baumel, 1993). The m. iliotrochantericus cranialis (= iliotrochantericus iliacus or anterior of Hudson et al., 1972) and medius are present in Megapodiidae and most other birds (George and Berger, 1966). These muscles are also separated in most tinamous, except for Tinamus and Crypturellus, in which the m. iliotrochantericus cranialis is fused through- out the m. iliotrochantericus medialis (Hudson et al., 1972).
155. – Musculus fibularis longus, sesamoid: absent (0); present (1). Specimens of Crypturellus soui, Crypturellus cinnamoneus, and Crypturellus boucardi show a sesamoid enclosed in the tendon of the m. fibularis longus (= m. peronaeus longus of Hudson et al., 1972).
156. – Musculus flexor hallucis longus and m. flexor digitorum longus: not fused (0); fused (1). The tendons of these muscles (related to the flexion movements of hallux and digits II, III, and IV) are fused at the middle of the tarsometatarsus, except in Nothura and Nothoprocta. After fusion, branches go only to the three fore-toes in Eudromia and Tinamotis, which lack a hallux (Hudson et al., 1972). As this is related to the absence of a hallux (character 111), this condi- tion, and other muscles associated with it (e.g. extensor hallucis longus, flexor hallucis brevis, etc.), was not coded for this analysis, to avoid re- dundant coding.
